Anna Hazare & his ilk – Boon or bane?

"Self appointed guardians are as bad, if not worse, than those appointed by the idiotic majority"

In the last few months, we have seen a sudden spurt in civil activism with the intent of ushering in a competent legislation to tackle corruption.  While the intent may be noble, is it the right way to accomplish the necessary things?

Corruption is arguably one of the biggest problems facing India. It is a roadblock in the nation’s development. Even in cases where some action has been taken regarding the benefit of common man, especially the poor and backward sections, it does not allow the intended beneficiary to actually reap the desired benefits. The foremost reasons for our inability to tackle corruption are the apathy of common man and the lack of political will. The lack of political will is understandable, considering that politics runs on money and they wouldn’t want to kill the golden goose. It is also a direct indictment of the common man because a bureaucrat is basically a common man holding position and power. If a large percentage of bureaucracy is corrupt, then it means there is something inherently wrong in us. I do not believe that power corrupts a person. It magnifies the deficiencies in a person, but it does not corrupt on its own. It is like saying having food grains makes you hungry. Absolute nonsense and indicative of the lack of moral obligation to take responsibility for our actions.
Anna Hazare and a group of people belonging to civil society have tried to coerce the government into passing a competent bill, but have apparently failed to do so. The government nevertheless went ahead with its vision, incorporating a few negligible things from the suggestions put forth in the dialogue they held with Anna Hazare and group. The said group is visibly upset. They now want to go ahead and protest with the intent to arm twist and coerce the government to accepting their version of the bill.

A lot of good things have come out of their actions so far and enough credit has been given to them by the media. That notwithstanding, it is essential to note the fact that they are plain wrong in their approach. Their intentions might be lofty and noble. They are all without doubt eminent people who have strived to serve the public. Anna Hazare has modeled a self-reliant village. The contributions of Justice Santhosh Hedge as Lok Ayukta are well known to the people of Karnataka. Similarly Kiran Bedi, Prashant Bhushan have all done outstanding work in their respective capacities.  That still does not justify their actions.

There are two aspects here. One is the approach taken by these people. Second is whether they actually represent the entire civil society.

I was astonished that the government consented to have dialogue with them in the first place. Ours is a parliamentary democracy and that is the backbone of our constitutional framework as well. The parliament exists for the sole purpose of legislation. No individual or group can hijack this function. If they are really interested to shape legislation, they should contest elections and be a part of the parliament. It is one thing to put pressure on the government to frame laws on certain aspects, but you cannot hijack the procedure and give them a bill saying “You have to pass this bill or else…” It is a subversion of democracy. There is a reason for the existence of parliament. There is a lot of animosity towards the political class, and rightly so. If you do not believe in the parliament, then work on an alternative form of democracy. But as long as the parliament exists, it is supreme and cannot go by the whims of any individual, whether it’s a Gandhian like Hazare or Gandhi himself. The ends cannot justify the means. You cannot claim to represent the civil society by holding the parliament to ransom.

And it is not a good precedent. Today it is Mr. Hazare against corruption. Tomorrow it will be some fanatics who want Hindutva as a core concept of our nation. Where do we draw the line? This is as far as the approach goes.

The next aspect is their claim that they represent the voice of the nation. The proof is of course, the number of people who have publicly supported this movement. Be it people who have actually done something by protesting alongside them, or be it people who like it on Facebook and move on. While it is a fact that the movement in general has received vast support from the citizens of India, it cannot claim to represent the entire civil society. Proof of this of course is that I do not. Surely, I cannot be the only one across India. There are various sections of the civil society out there who do not agree with all the views of this group.

They also claim of a referendum held which proves that the majority of Indian citizens want the ‘Jan Lokpal bill’ to be passed. It is very debatable. 
First it is only an opinion poll. It may be a poll with the largest representative population; nevertheless it remains an opinion poll. That too one conducted by an interested party and not an absolutely impartial third party. 
Second, the majority of the public cannot understand all the aspects of the Jan Lokpal bill. Granted, it has a lot of positives, especially when compared to the government draft. But people do not understand all aspects. Is it even feasible? What are the negatives of the bill? If someone says it is perfect the way it is, then it is indeed a joke.
Third, the poll is a questionnaire of basically yes/no type of responses. Take on instance mentioned in a news channel debate. Apparently 85% of people say the Prime Minister should be included in the ambit of Lokpal. But that does not mean we have to proceed about it the way Jan Lokpal bill says. There are various opinions on the matter. It is obvious that no government can function with constant interference from the public. There is apparently another version of the bill (from the civil society) which lays out lengthy guidelines for targeting the P.M. So the group’s claim that they are validated by the ‘referendum’ is either misplaced or deceptive.

Democracy is indeed "of the people, by the people, for the people," but it still makes sense to not allow people to interfere in everything. I would definitely want a law that has been enacted after due diligence by the people who are elected, than a law that has been elected because the vast majority who do not understand the law-making procedure and who have voted for it in a misplaced trust in self-appointed guardians of the society.

It is imperative for the government to convince the civil society about its interest in bringing a strong anti-corruption law. It is also essential to drive home the point that nobody can subvert the parliament and related process of legislation making.

While I believe that the public has to fight tooth and nail with the political class on corruption, it is necessary to do it the right way. You cannot point at what Gandhi did to the British. At the end of the day, Gandhi was fighting the British. We on the other hand need to fight with our fellow Indians; the people who we have chosen to represent us. We need to fight responsibly.

Ends do not justify the means; nor does intent, for that matter.


Posted 1st August 2011 by Sampath T J