How secular are we? **


If there's one thing the whole world agrees on, it is the fact that India, as a nation, is an inherent paradox.

We all love to proclaim that we are a secular nation. And given the diversity that India is, any secularism and unity that exists is no minor feat. But here too, India is a paradox. While on one hand we have a vast majority who try, or at least claim to keep the state and religion separate, there are however a significant number of citizens who are sectarian. While this number maybe a minority, it is a non-negligible minority. A nation is neither the majority constituent, nor the minority. It is a fusion of both. So even if the majority proclaims to be secular, India cannot be called completely secular unless there exist only a few rogue elements that are sectarian. It may not be practical to expect a nation (especially one as diverse as India) to have a unanimous view, but a significant minority cannot be neglected.

Recently an exercise was conducted for school children by an NGO where they were asked to draw a terrorist. That brought out the inherent preconceptions and stereotypes in these children about terrorists. How fair is it? I'm sure most of us would imagine a bearded Muslim when we think of a terrorist. Some people might also think of a suave gentleman, but even here a majority would still imagine him a Muslim. is it fair to stereotype and doubt the integrity of a whole community? It would be good to remember at this point that a majority of this community CHOSE to stay on in India (amid constant threat to their life and amidst great hostility) during and after the partition. Logic decrees that they identify themselves as Indians first and Muslims next. 

Every time India is targeted in a terrorist attack,  the natural suspects are of course Pakistan, ISI, LeT, JeM, or the Indian Mujahideen or somewhere close. And every time, our Muslim brothers complain that their community is being unfairly targeted. While it may be a fair complaint, can we neglect that these are indeed some of the groups who would love to see the day India is destroyed and these are the groups who are working actively towards it? And also can we neglect that at least 90% of the people belonging to these groups are Muslims? It is a grievous mistake to blindly suspect a person of being terrorist solely based on his religion. But it is an even bigger mistake to try not to investigate suspects out of fear of marginalizing a group or for being politically correct, especially when the security of a nation is at stake. Secularism doesn't necessarily mean the majority going out of its way to make the minority feel secure, it means the majority and minority coexisting with mutual respect which implies that the minority also has a duty to make the majority feel secure.
It is undeniable that most of us are inherently biased and so probably our actions may be biased too. But what is also undeniable is that it is wrong to claim that the establishment is totally unfair and that suspecting certain individuals or groups is unwarranted just because they belong to the minority. Just as belonging to one community doesn't mean he/she is a terrorist, having a bias doesn't necessarily mean that we should be lenient in our approach in apprehending suspects who belong to that community.

All said and done, the establishment should look into groups trying to ignite communal feelings. It is not a fantasy to imagine that members of one community could orchestrate attacks on themselves to justify their intolerance towards another community. So where I claim that the minority has a duty towards making the majority feel secure, we need to have institutional mechanisms to ensure that the majority maintain their end of the bargain. Where it is common belief that groups like LeT, IM, et al are trying to destabilize our nation, an equal hand is played by the so-called Hindutva organisations. Isn't it natural to expect members of the minority community to lash back at a society which ill treats them.

All the good activities attributed to RSS and associated organisations does not nullify their concerted attack on the integrity of this country. Its high time these people realized that religion is a personal thing which should not interfere with the working of the state.

Being a Muslim doesn't automatically make you a terrorist. Being a Hindu doesn't automatically make you innocent. It is in the wise interest of the nation's unity that every individual stops suspecting every Muslim (especially those conforming to stereotypes) to be a terrorist and also start judging Hindu organisations trying to incite communal passions in the same class as the above Muslim organizations. The similarities - both are out to destroy this country in the name of religion. And what's worse? Both groups believe they are right!


PS: Any constructive criticism is both expected and appreciated. Any viewpoints contrary to what I have said are also welcome. And do not expect replies to any attempts to start a debate on religion or any attempt to wholly condemn or wholly glorify any one organisation or sect mentioned above.

** This article is not intended to hurt anyone's feelings, but I completely stand by what I have said here. Just my thoughts and opinions. And if you feel that I've just blabbed things without a conclusion, that is because there is no conclusion. The only solution i can think of is that everybody starts thinking about these issues and a solution will presented as a result.


Posted 22nd July 2011 by Sampath T J