Role of Media - Cover a protest? Or be a part of the protest?


                                 No news is good news.  No journalists is even better.  
                                                                                                                ~Nicolas Bentley

The latest ‘breaking news’ is that the government is looking at regulating the media. Now this has created quite a stir. On one side we have the media saying they already have self-regulation (I know :-P) and that the government is only trying to shoot the messenger for its woes. On another side we have the opposition trying to get its share of political mileage by recalling and equating this to the whole emergency period and how the congress is fascist (Look who’s speaking :-D).

I just watched a debate on NDTV and various people talked about various things. Kiran Bedi even said that using the media was not a conscious strategy. Ridiculous! The other point made was that if a handful of people on Mr. Hazare’s team could manage the media, then so can the government. And that it should use Doordarshan to fairly showcase its point of view.

Now no matter what anyone claims, it is a fact that the media was not impartial and unbiased in the case of Anna Hazare’s movement. It may be unfair to say that the media covered the event for too long. Because it is obvious media has to cover what action is going on. But the basic functionality of media is to give its audience unbiased and complete information to let them form their own opinions. But the media was manufacturing opinion. What was actually happening here was they were ending segments with rhetorical questions intended to make you form a set of opinions. I myself have seen on various social networking sites and in my friends circle, at least 30% of them did not support the ‘movement’. And with good reasons. But we hardly saw the electronic media give information against Hazare’s movement.

Now, while I do believe that the media should be free of government control, there is definitely a growing need for a regulation mechanism. It is both funny and sad to see the news anchors arguing that they already have self-regulation and so nothing new is needed. Because, these are the same people who justified Hazare’s movement saying government will not self-regulate and hence the need for an extra-constitutional means.

Now coming to the point that it is wrong to say they managed the media, because if a handful of people can do it, so can the government with all resources at its disposal. It is not true. The annoying trio of Prashant Bhushan, Arvind Kejriwal and Kiran Bedi could manage the media not because of some superior intellect than the government, but rather because the media let them use it. And the same media would never let the government use it. Now coming to the concept of the government using the DD to get its point across. Well, no one would take it seriously. You might argue that DD has the largest base of audience. But the crowds participating in the protests didn’t come from far off places with no private channels. They were all people who were in the mass mentality mode after watching these private news channels and because a lot of their friends spoke about it on social networking sites.

Now, if people are so influenced by the media, it means the media has power. And with power comes responsibility. And responsibility needs regulation. It is nonsense to say media is different from politicians. They’re all the same. Media is in itself neither more sensible nor more responsible than the political class. Its time some form of fair regulation is developed for our TRP-hungry media.  

If the media is what it claims to be, then regulation is essential. Now it may not necessarily be government regulation, but what is wrong in having a regulation? What are they afraid of? Bloody hypocrites!


Posted 1st September 2011 by Sampath T J