Today's Education:


The function of education is to teach one to think intensively and to think critically. Intelligence plus character - that is the goal of true education. 
 - Martin Luther King, Jr. 
The above quote is one among many which talk about the importance of not just education, but also about what education should mean. Does the current system of education stand up to the standards indicated by the above quote?

The present system of education is superfluous, as are many things in our life. It is just rat race, where the victorious are deemed better than the rest. They are given pats on the backs and then given jobs where they are expected to run faster than the rat race called education. In a sense, that is where this system is meaningful. If the rest of your career and life will be a perennial rat race, the system prepares you for that race, by making you part of smaller races which will prepare you for the future. But that begs the question. Is it right? Perhaps the questions on education reflect on the larger happenings in life. Nevertheless, of what use is a system which says a person is good only if he manages to score 'x' percentage or grade? Worse, the bar keeps on increasing. The result? A bunch of bright students who could score 95% in a subject without understanding some of the fundamental concepts in the subject. The mushrooming of numerous coaching centers and tutorials is not encouraging either. This is an educational system which neither guarantees that the top scorers are practically and technically sound nor that those who are indeed sound in related fields will necessarily score well.

Another aspect is the effect this culture has on the psyche of the public in general. For a nation already steeped in stereotypes, it is added burden when people begin to judge a man based on his academic educational qualification. We seem to think that 'educated' people are obviously better than 'uneducated' ones. Not to say that educated people are no better at all, but it is not necessarily by default that they are. I see infants being tottered off to abacus classes and summer camps. I see high school children egged on to give up their life and prepare seriously for IITs. Is this what we want for our children? 

Indeed the system is not totally worthless. It has its advantages, no doubt. But they're just not enough to justify the negatives. That is where I miss the old Indian gurukula system. While I do realize its impractical to try n revive it in its original form, we could at least fuse the good aspects of both the systems, resulting in something truly useful for life as opposed something that is just a tool to gain employment. While employment, no doubt is essential, it is not the be all and end all of life. Many people have employment but not a life There are other things, like character. Values inculcated in young minds automatically means a better society. And I don't mean empty preaching. Children are more intelligent than we believe. They learn from what they see, not from what they hear. They aren't fools.

I myself studied in an institution which followed formal academic system, but it was integrated with other things. It was a very spiritual environment, where the elders practiced before they preached. We learnt things from mythology to vedas and mantras & moral stories, to dramas and dances.. And learnt a great deal about various people through history. There are a lot of people who think that bringing children in a religious environment is bad. But from personal experience, I know I've turned out OK, and so have most of the people I know. The important thing is to not be fanatic, to simultaneously inculcate a sense of respect towards all creed and non-superiority of any one sect or religion. In all fairness, while the customs we followed might have been very 'Hindu' we learnt enough about the kindness of Jesus or Prophet Muhammad too. What is better is that while we soaked in the values and practices of Hinduism, we never practiced the corruptions that Hinduism has undergone over the centuries such as the germs of caste and discrimination. Religion was a personal thing. And we were taught to keep it that way. Religion, when used properly is a great tool to shape young minds and inculcate in them a sense of brotherhood of humanity. 
Of course, it goes without saying that if and when we do try n fuse elements of religion and academics, we must always look for those rogue elements who threaten the harmony by making religion more than personal. A spiritual atmosphere always helps, but a fanatic one never does.

So the right way forward would be to model education not just as a employment-gaining machine, but as a system that actually improves one's life. A system which imparts life skills and moulds minds into a harmonious society, but which also gives you a means of livelihood. While livelihood is absolutely essential, it is not of much use without a LIFE! 

Reform need not necessarily be through religion, but it is one solution. There will be other solutions out there. But I can only speak for what I have seen personally. After all what use is education if its not a life-altering process?

PS: Any constructive criticism is both expected and appreciated. Though it might be good to keep in mind that this is the first article i'm publishing :)


And anyone out there who wants a debate pros and cons of religion, forget it. U won't get anything from me :P
Posted 19th July 2011 by Sampath T J